Legislation : (b) For writ of mandamus directing the Union of India and all States and Union Territories to provide Hot Cooked Meals, Take Home Rations in consonance to the provisions of the National Food Security Act, 2013 as well as The Supplementary Nutrition (under the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme)Rules, 2020 as well as make provisions for additional Supplementary Nutrition provisions to all beneficiaries of the ICDS Scheme in the form of a comprehensive package of Cooked Food, Eggs, Fruits, dry rations including cereals, pulses, etc.

Statute : 3. The Parliament enacted the National Food Security Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act, 2013") to provide for food and nutritional security in human life cycle approach, by ensuring access to adequate quantity of quality food at affordable prices to people to live a life with dignity and for matters connected therewith

Statute : 4. The Act, 2013 by Section 4 creates a statutory right of every pregnant woman and lactating mother free meals during pregnancy and six months after the child birth

Statute : 8. Under Section 7 of the Act, 2013 it is the obligation of the State Governments to implement schemes covering entitlements under Sections 4,5 and 6 of the Act, 2013 in accordance with the guidelines, including cost sharing, between the Central Government and the State Governments in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government

Statute : 8. The Schedule II of the Act, 2013 provides for nutritional standards

Statute : 8. Schedule II of the Act, 2013 is as follows:


Statute : 9. The lockdowns which were placed in the entire country in exercise of the power under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 were lifted by the competent authority in phased manner and gradually specified activities were permitted to be opened

Statute : 19. The Centre as well as States are statutorily obliged to implement statutory obligation as imposed under Sections 4,5 and 6 of the Act, 2013

Statute : 19. The nutritional support is required to be of the nutritional standards which have already been laid down to Schedule II of the Act, 2013 and all States/UTs are obliged to implement such Scheme and have to comply with Schedule II

Statute : 19. Provision of foodgrains as per the provisions of the National Food Security Act, 2013 is a statutory obligation on the State

Statute : 20.2020 in exercise of powers under Section 10(2)(l) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, wherein in paragraph 8, it was provided that Anganwadis shall remain functional by distributing the food items and nutrition once in fifteen days at the doorsteps of the beneficiaries i

Statute : 31. The nutritional standard as provided in Schedule II of Act, 2013, has to be met by all States and Union Territories

Statute : 32. There is no doubt that the Central Government as well as all the States and Union Territories have issued necessary guidelines for implementing statutory requirements of Act, 2013 and for meeting the nutritional standards

Statute : (IV) All States/Union Territories shall ensure that nutritional standards as provided in Schedule II of National Food Security Act, 2013, reproduced herein above in para 13 is fulfilled by providing nutritional support to pregnant women, lactating mothers, nutritional support to children who suffer from malnutrition.

